## The Very Beginning (1950's)
The first video games can be traced back to the early 1950's right along with the very first computers with a video display. Back then, computers were solely used by defense departments to calculate the path of artillery, and universities to compute complex mathematics. One of the earliest video games, *Tennis for Two* (1958), took advantage of the fact that computers were already being used to accurately simulate trajectories to create a very convincing tennis game. This was over a decade before the release of *Pong* (1972). Likewise, *Spacewar!* (1962) used these simulations to create a space-shooter video game well before *Asteroids* (1979). These early video games were created by and enjoyed by the people lucky enough to have access to these first computers (professors, students, and defense contractors). It wouldn't be until the late 1970's that computer technology would become affordable enough for consumers.

## The Arcade Era (1970's - 1980's)
As computer technology became smaller and cheaper, companies could start to market video games to consumers. The first consumers however, were not individuals for use in their homes, they were bars and restaurants. The technology *was* getting smaller, but not small enough for the home. The first commercial video games were large arcade cabinets such as *Computer Space* (1971) and the aforementioned *Pong* (1972) created by the company Atari. As arcade machines became more popular, they moved out of bars and into their own dedicated spaces, aptly named: **arcades**. Arcades were typically free to enter, with each game requiring a small price to play (usually a quarter). While arcades exist to this day, they are no where near as popular as they were in their golden-age of the 80's. This is largely due to the fact that video game technology began to become small and affordable enough to fit inside the living room.

## Home Consoles and Personal Computers (Late 1970's - Today)
The first home console, the *Magnavox Odyssey* (1972), released around the same time as early arcade cabinets, but was a bit ahead of its time and did not see much commercial success, only selling about 350,000 units. The first majorly successful home console was the *Atari 2600* (1977). Being the first, Atari had a lot of experience making arcade cabinets. People loved playing their games in the arcade, so when they re-released those games on their home console, Atari were able to sell roughly 30 million units. Other early consoles include the *Intellivision* (1979), *ColecoVision* (1982), and *Vectrex* (1982). You may notice that none of these consoles were created by the home console companies that we know today; Nintendo, Microsoft, and Sony. This is because the introduction of popular home computers, such as the *IBM PC* (1981) and *Commodore 64* (1982), caused a major crash for home consoles in the early 80's. Selling very few units, none of these early companies survived. Even with all of their earlier success, Atari's second console, the *Atari 5200* (1982), only managed to sell around one million units. Thankfully, home consoles bounced back from the crash with the later success of the *Nintendo Entertainment System (NES)* (1985). The NES is largely responsible for the modern resurgence in home game consoles that persists to this day.

## Handheld Gaming (1990's - Today)
As video game technology got even smaller, consoles were able to go from the living room to the pocket. The first handheld game consoles include the *Atari Lynx* (1989), *Sega Game Gear* (1990), and the *Nintendo Game Boy* (1990). The handheld market has been largely dominated by Nintendo. Sony saw some success with the *PlayStation Portable (PSP)* (2004), and *PS Vita* (2012), but they have no modern handheld console. The only competitor to Nintendo today is Steam's *Steam Deck* (2022). One major reason companies don't invest in handheld consoles today is because it is much cheaper to create mobile games for smartphones.

## Mobile Gaming (2010's - Today)
As soon as cell phones had screens, companies were selling them with games. *Snake* (1998) was massively popular on Nokia phones, for example. The tiny, black and white screens and slow wireless data plans of the late 90's and early 2000's prevented gaming on cellphones from seeing mainstream success, however. That was until Apple's *iPhone* (2007) kicked off the smartphone era, of course. Pocket gaming found a perfect home on these large, full-color, back-lit screens. Marketplaces such as Apple's *App Store* (2008), and Google's *Play Store* (2008) made it possible for anyone to share and sell their games online without having to sell physical discs.

## AAA vs Indie
As we learned, the earliest video games were create by curious computer scientists, experimenting with new technology. They were hobbyists. As the technology became more widespread, companies (such as Atari) formed that could make a profit from the video games they made. But there have always remained a small group of dedicated hobbyists, making games for fun. In the early days, they made games for home computers, as writing code and putting it on a console's cartridge was only possible if you worked for the company. These hobbyists were able to save their games on magnetic disks and share them with friends; a process called **shareware**. Some of these games would become so popular through just word-of-mouth alone that these **indie developers** could sell them from their home, or even sell the rights to them to **AAA companies**. Having to purchase these disks to put games on was often too cost-prohibitive for most hobbyists. In the 1990's however, the internet was able make sharing and selling games a possibility for all indie devs. These indie games were still relegated to home computers however, as home consoles would not be able to connect to the internet until the early 2000's. Even then, because of limited storage space, the internet connectivity was not used to sell/download games, only to play multiplayer games. It wouldn't be until Microsoft's *Xbox 360* (2005), supported *Xbox Live Community Games* (2008) that indie devs could see their games hit home consoles. Soon after, Nintendo and Sony would create their own online stores where indie devs could publish games.