Depending on the size and budget of the **game studio**, there can be many different roles that go into making a video game. Indie studios can consist of a single person that does everything from writing the first line of code to self-publishing on a digital storefront like _Steam_. AAA Studios, on the other hand, have a dedicated person, or even team of people, for every role imaginable. So, what does it take to make a video game?

-   **Programmer**: When people think _Game Developer_, they are typically picturing a person, sat at a desk, typing code into a computer. Indeed, much of the work of creating a game is programming. Solo indie developers typically, but not always, start as programmers, then learn how create art, music, and good levels later. In AAA studios there are many sub-categories of programmer, as the largest titles today are _incredibly_ complex. For example, AAA studios have a team of programmers just to code software that makes the other programmer's jobs easier. They'll make level-editors, menu-editors, scripts that make timing dialogue easier, and so on. Other programming roles include, folks who code the physics, graphics, controls, online networking for multiplayer, and so much more.
-   **Artist**: Artist is another role that encompasses many sub-roles. An indie developer may only need to worry about getting good at pixel art (not to make that sound simple! It takes years to become a great pixel artist). AAA studios will have teams that work on lighting, shading, texturing, 3D modeling and rigging, animating, user interface design, etc.
-   **Designer**: This is the career for people who have ever played a video game and thought to themselves "This game would be _soooo_ much better if...". There is a major misconception with this career to watch out for. **_No one will buy your game idea!_** Do you stay up every night in bed thinking you created the best idea for a killer new RPG, and if only you could pitch this idea to some rich person in a suit, you'd make a million bucks? In the nicest way possible, I wan't you to know, this is an absolute fantasy. Unlike with movies where you can get lucky and pitch a script to a producer in LA, or with TV where you can pitch a pilot, a game idea alone is worthless. You will need to be able to program, design art, and music (or hire people who can). No publisher will give you money without a playable demo. I cannot stress this enough.
-   **Producer**: These are the folks with the money. Producers fund video games and help manage the project as a whole. This job only really exists at AAA studios, where all of the different departments require coordination.
-   **Tester**: Game tester sounds like a dream for those that love to play games, but it is important to keep in mind that testing games is a very repetitive process, and nothing like playing games for entertainment. Testers often have to do silly things during bug-testing, such as running into every wall to make sure the player character doesn't go them.
-   **Composer**: A game composer is responsible for creating, playing, and recording the game's soundtrack. Much like a composer for a movie, a game composer must work closely with the development team to ensure the emotions of the music match the feel of the game.
-   **Sound Designer**: At first glance, this may seem to be the same job as the composer, but sound design is very different. While the composer focuses on music, sound design focuses on all the other sounds such as foot steps, explosions, car engine noises and so on.
-   **Writer**: Much like a writer for film or television, these are the folks that write what the characters say and how the overall story-line plays out.
-   **Publisher**: Much like a book publisher, a video game publisher's job is to get the product to the customer. Back-in-the-day, this meant printing the game onto disks, creating the box art, and making sure they get shipped to video game stores. Today, many games can be self-published on electronic storefronts such as _Steam_, _Xbox Live_, and _PlayStation Network (PSN)_. Even if a game does not release on a physical disk, publishers can help with advertising.
